      To overcome such restrictions, a large variety of approaches that
simplify force fields have been developed, including Gaussian network
models (GNM), elastic network models (ENM), lattice and Gō models. Lattice
models, for example, do this by restricting a system’s coordinates to
lattice positions and these simplified models are allowed to adopt only a
small discrete number of conformational states, while the constituent
neighbour monomers experience some sort of interaction specified by the
monomer types and connections. For example, the interactions between
adjacent monomers can be chosen as random variables from a continuous
probability distribution [Sali, Shakhnovich and Karplus, 1994; Shakhnovich
et al., 1991].    In addition to studying specific protein folding dynamics,
lattice models have also been used to try and answer broader, more general
theoretical questions about proteins, like why some sequences are protein-
like and others are not. This is because there is a huge interest not only
in how proteins function once in their folded state, but also in how
exactly proteins come to adopt and fold into their native states.
      It   should  be   mentioned   at this  point that,  although  all  the
approaches already mentioned thus far have been described from the point of
view of their utility in simulating macromolecular dynamics, they are
useful for probing many intrinsic properties of these systems, or for
investigating models of evolution of these systems [Williams, Pollock and
Goldstein,   2001],   and  have   even  been  used to  facilitate  structure
refinement [Schroder, Brunger and Levitt, 2007].
      The advantages of simplified and/or constrained models are clear in
terms of computational gains, but the agreement between constrained and
unconstrained trajectories depends on the formulation details and the
constraining scheme. For example, van Gunsteren and Karplus showed in their
BPTI protein simulations that the use of fixed bond lengths does not
significantly alter a system’s dynamical properties, but that fixing bond
angles does [Van Gunsteren and Karplus, 1982].
      Above we touched on the idea that QC and MM methods suffer from one
major drawback which is an inability to sample large time scales and/or
large systems based on computational limits that make such simulations
impractical.   CG approaches have been developed with the goal to further
simplify atomistic models, and this simpler description of the effective
interactions in a given system is to be achieved while not losing the
ability of the resulting models to predict properties of interest[Izvekov
and Voth, 2005]. For most such models, the technical implementation
involves two distinct phases – partitioning the system into the larger
structural units to reduce the system complexity, and construction of an
effective force field to describe the interaction between the coarse
grained structural units [Izvekov and Voth, 2005]. CG models of proteins
often combine groups of atoms in a given structure into a system of rigid
bodies connected by joints, and contact between the bodies considers such
things as excluded volume constraints and spring potentials to model
elasticity in the system[Parker, Bryant and Delp, 2009].
      Coarse  graining   is  also  often   used  by  collective  coordinate
algorithms. These aim to separate the large collective motions from the
smaller, and presumably less important, motions to obtain information about
structural flexibility and therefore function. This group of methods
includes principal component analysis (PCA), normal mode analysis and their
derivatives. PCA is a dimensionality reducing method and is another well
established mathematical technique that is borrowed from the field of
statistical analysis to be applied to biological simulations of proteins by
                                                                            25
[Altis et al., 2007; Balsera et al., 1996; Caves et al., 1998; Lou and
Cukier, 2006; Maisuradze and Leitner, 2007] and others. The ensemble of
structures analyzed may be from either a collection of X-ray structures in
the PDB Databank or from any simulation trajectory, such as a molecular
dynamics run. Alternatively, when these are not available, conformational
sampling techniques can be used as an alternative to generate an ensemble.
The CONCOORD program [de Groot et al., 1997], for example, does not rely on
a potential surface, but only on geometric considerations that are used to
generate a series of conformations (not a time series) that satisfy a set
of distance constraints.   The benefit of this method is that it can sample
conformations that might otherwise not be found in a typical MD simulation
and as such can be used to complement such dynamic, energy-based methods.
      NMA methods are based on the harmonic approximation which says that
changes in energy on displacement from a stationary point are a quadratic
function of that displacement. This approximation is valid when the
displacements are small enough so that higher order terms in the function
that describes the displacement can be ignored; otherwise anharmonic
theories that include them are necessary. NMA methods are therefore local.
They consider only a limited portion of the potential energy surface and
the dynamics of the system within it. Seminal contributions in the field of
normal modes applied to proteins simulations have been made by Tirion,
Bahar, and Jernigan among others (see [Chu and Voth, 2006; Hayward, Kitao
and Berendsen, 1997; Soheilifard, Makarov and Rodin, 2008; Tirion, 1996;
                                                                            26
Tirion et al., 1995; van der Spoel et al., 1996; Yang, Song and Jernigan,
2007; Zhang et al., 2009] for examples and reviews).

